=== Query ===

A query using in context of the runtime container can represented in two different ways, as string literal or as instance of a class implementing the 'IQuery' interface. If the query is represented as string-literal the runtime container auTomatically create a new instance of IQuery representing the given string-literal using the 'QueryFactory' of the engine. 

==== Query-Factory ====

Currently there is no industrial standard of a topic maps query language, but it is fundamental for each business application to extract the information used to resolve the use cases in a easy way. Because of that and the missing standard there are many languages realizing a query language of topic maps at the moment - tolog, Toma, TMQL and a topic maps path language. Many applications using topic maps are based on one of this query languages but can not handle any other of them. The tmql4j provides the functionality to convert any other query format to a topic maps query language pattern ( TMQL ). A developer can use a simple interface to add a new query transformer module to the core implementation of the tmql4j engine and can use his language, like SQL, to query a topic map.

Because of the different syntactical notification of each language it is not secure to instantiate a query by using a specific IQuery implementation class, except the user can be sure that the given literal is valid in context of the represented query language. Instead of initializing the query the query factory shall be used to create a query from a given string-literal. The query factory try to detect the query language the given string-literal is written in and create a new instance of this query class. Because of the fact that the tmql4j engine only handles real TMQL queries the 'toTMQL' method will be called by the query factory to transform the specific query to a TMQL query. A developer has to provide the transformation functionality to use his own query language with the tmql4j engine. 

==== tmql4j-tolog PlugIn ====

The 'tmql4j-tolog' plugin implementing a query transformer for the query language tolog, which was established as de-facto standard as a part of the Ontopia topic maps engine. Some parts of the current draft inspired by the tolog query language. In combination with the plugin the tmql4j engine can used with tolog queries. Please note that the current version of the tmql4j-tolog' plugin only supports the querying part of the tolog query language and not the additional modification part developed in 2009. The next version of the plugin will be support the whole tolog specification.

==== Integrate your own query language plug-in ====

The tmql4j engine can be extended by own query language plugins to integrate your own query language in the tmql4j engine. The new plugin has to contain at least one class implements the 'IQuery' interface of the tmql4j engine. In addition the tmql4j engine contains an abstract base implementation of 'IQuery' implementing the base functions of this interface. The abstract base class can be use to reduce the implementation work.

-------------------------------------
1:	public class MyQueryImplementation extends QueryImpl {
2:	...
3:	}
-------------------------------------

